Add instructions for using DDEV (#19)
farmOS/farmOS-community-blog: posts/2023/installing-farmos-on-ddev-with-composer/index.md

---
title: Installing farmOS on DDEV with Composer
date: 2023-05-17
author: rgcarr
slug: 2023/installing-farmos-on-ddev-with-composer
---

# DDEV

> For the recommended farmOS local development environment using Docker and Docker compose, see the 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For the recommended farmOS local development environment using Docker and Docker Compose, see the 
```

> DDEV is an open source tool for running local web development environments for PHP, Python and Node.js, ready in minutes. Its powerful, flexible per-project environment configurations can be extended, version controlled, and shared. DDEV allows development teams to adopt a consistent Docker workflow without the complexities of bespoke configuration.

DDEV's many features are what make it a great way to build Drupal and farmOS
projects in a local environment:

* Cross-platform, open source software.
* Supports many versions of Docker or can be used with Colima.
* When combined with Colima and Mutagen, performance is significantly improved.
* Automatic HTTPS.
* Run multiple projects concurrently.
* Can be used to develop many other CMSs.
* Support multiple databases (including MySQL, Postgre, SQLite).
* Lots of developer tools included, and is easy to extend and integrate.  

# Installing farmOS with DDEV and Composer

- First, follow the instructions to install and setup DDEV: https://ddev.readthedocs.io/en/latest/users/install/
- Once installed, the following commands will create a DDEV project and install farmOS:

```
# Create a directory for the farmOS DDEV project

> mkdir -p farmos-project && cd farmos-project

Reviewer: When creating just a single directory right in the current working directory, the `-p` argument is not needed.
```suggestion
mkdir farmos-project && cd farmos-project
```

> ddev config --project-type=drupal10 --docroot=web --create-docroot --database=postgres:15 --php-version=8.1

Reviewer: I've updated the https://github.com/wotnak/ddev-php-geos addon to support other php versions so potentially for farmOS v3 php 8.2 could be used. It is supported by Drupal 10.1, will be recommended by Drupal 10.2 https://www.drupal.org/project/drupal/releases/10.2.0-alpha1#recommendations and active support for php 8.1 ends in less than 3 weeks https://www.php.net/supported-versions.php.

I also created a DDEV addon that simplifies configuration for farmOS. It supports farmOS v2 and v3, and it is possible to add support of more versions in the future. It allows providing more general DDEV setup instructions that not counting updating one version variable shouldn't change between farmOS versions. https://github.com/wotnak/ddev-farmos
Using something like it would allow these instructions to remain relevant longer without any updates.

Reviewer 2: I was wondering about 8.2, thank you for updating that! I also really like `wotnak/ddev-farmos` addon, that makes this much easier. But I would also like to demonstrate configuring these aspects of DDEV yourself. See my suggestion in my other comment that includes both?

ddev get wotnak/ddev-php-geos
ddev start
ddev composer create "farmos/project:3.x-dev"
ddev drush site:install farm --account-name=admin --account-pass=admin -y
ddev drush uli

> ddev launch

Reviewer: I would remove either `ddev drush uli` or `ddev launch` since they both serve a similar purpose. `drush uli` displays login link and `ddev launch` opens (in this case) login form in the browser, using both at the same time is a bit redundant. Especially since in the line above login and password are provided, so the login link in this case is not really needed.

Reviewer 2: Agreed. And both commands are included in the useful commands below. I'll remove `ddev launch`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

```

## Usage

### Useful DDEV commands:
- Start/stop a project: `ddev start`/ `ddev stop`
- Open project: `ddev launch`

> - Stop ddev: `ddev poweroff`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Stop DDEV: `ddev poweroff`
```

can be built.

DDEV provides integrations with hosting providers to simplify the process of
syncing production data into a local environment. For more information see
[Hosting Provider Integration](https://ddev.readthedocs.io/en/stable/users/providers/)

# Docker image limitations

farmOS uses Docker and Docker Compose to create and distribute reproducible
development environments. Each commit to
farmOS builds a new Docker image that includes the environment and development
dependencies required to install, test, and lint the core codebase. While this
process works well to onboard many new contributors and developers of
farmOS, it also produces some headaches.

Docker can be unintuitive to install and configure on non-linux systems. Long-existing platform issues
such as slow file systems in macOS and WSL2 complexities in Windows frequently present challenges for
new farmOS admins and developers.

Another issue with development and production environments based on the official
farmOS Docker images is that many use-cases quickly outgrow the default set of modules
and site configuration. In some cases, one can work around that with a deep understanding

> of Docker and/or Docker compose, but such environments can be fragile to updates and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
of Docker and/or Docker Compose, but such environments can be fragile to updates and
```

supported environments for developing farmOS core and small projects but can
require additional configuration when working on larger projects in different
environments like Colima. For these use-cases installing farmOS in a
[DDEV](https://ddev.com/) environment may be more straightforward.

> DDEV is an open source tool for running local web development environments for PHP, Python and Node.js, ready in minutes. Its powerful, flexible per-project environment configurations can be extended, version controlled, and shared. DDEV allows development teams to adopt a consistent Docker workflow without the complexities of bespoke configuration.

DDEV's many features are what make it a great way to build Drupal and farmOS
projects in a local environment:

* Cross-platform, open source software.
* Supports many versions of Docker or can be used with Colima.
* When combined with Colima and Mutagen, performance is significantly improved.
* Automatic HTTPS.
* Run multiple projects concurrently.
* Can be used to develop many other CMSs.
* Support multiple databases (including MySQL, PostgreSQL, SQLite).
* Lots of developer tools included, and is easy to extend and integrate.  

> # Installing farmOS with DDEV and Composer
> 
> - First, follow the instructions to install and setup DDEV: https://ddev.readthedocs.io/en/latest/users/install/
> - Once installed, the following commands will create a DDEV project and install farmOS:
> 
> ```
> # Create a directory for the farmOS DDEV project
> mkdir farmos-project && cd farmos-project
> ddev config --project-type=drupal10 --docroot=web --create-docroot --database=postgres:15 --php-version=8.1

Reviewer 2: ````suggestion
# Installing farmOS with DDEV and Composer

- First, follow the instructions to install and setup DDEV: https://ddev.readthedocs.io/en/latest/users/install/
- Once installed, you can create a DDEV project and install farmOS. Your DDEV project is configured to use
a specific PHP and database version and can include additional DDEV addons and services. Here are two
examples of how to create and configure your DDEV project:

1. Use the `wotnak/ddev-farmos` addon to configure a DDEV project with the latest recommended versions
of PHP, PostgreSQL and PHP GEOS for farmOS. This addon will also configure the private filesystem and a Cron job for Drupal.
```
# Create a directory for the farmOS DDEV project
mkdir farmos-project && cd farmos-project
ddev config --project-type=php
ddev get wotnak/ddev-farmos
ddev composer create farmos/project:3.x-dev
ddev drush site:install farm --account-name=admin --account-pass=admin -y
ddev drush uli
```

2. If you prefer, you can also configure each aspect of the DDEV project yourself:
```
# Create a directory for the farmOS DDEV project
mkdir farmos-project && cd farmos-project
ddev config --project-type=drupal10 --docroot=web --create-docroot --database=postgres:15 --php-version=8.2
````

Reviewer 2: @wotnak what do you think of this? I removed the `FARMOS_VERSION=2/3` variable complexity because very soon we will be recommending v3. Does that break anything?

Reviewer: Looks good. Removing the `FARMOS_VERSION` variable doesn't break anything.

---
title: Installing farmOS on DDEV with Composer
date: 2023-05-17

> author: rgcarr

Reviewer 3: Not essential (and I don't know how we'd do it with the front-matter), but I wonder if we want to have a pattern of including an "et al" link back to the PR here when the authorship of the post is complex...

Reviewer 2: Yeah I was starting to wonder the same... Gastby might have a way to see & link to the commit authors for a given post? Though this might not always be ideal.

Reviewer 3: Agreed. I tend to favor explicitly referencing the authors or the pull request in the front-matter rather than something automatic using git. I feel it introduces too many complexities when your build system starts inspecting the source control layer itself. (for more than just basic branch/release/tags)

Reviewer 2: @wotnak would you like to be listed as an author here?

slug: 2023/installing-farmos-on-ddev-with-composer
---

# DDEV

The recommended method to install farmOS in a local development environment
using Docker and Docker Compose is documented

> [here](https://farmos.org/development/environment). This method works great in

Reviewer 3: "here" as the link text is an accessibility anti-pattern: https://usability.yale.edu/web-accessibility/articles/links#link-text

Maybe it could be rewritten to something like:

```suggestion
For the recommended farmOS local development environment using Docker and Docker compose, see the 
[farmOS development environment docs](https://farmos.org/development/environment). That method works great in
```

Reviewer 2: Committed!

DDEV's many features are what make it a great way to build Drupal and farmOS
projects in a local environment:

* Cross-platform, open source software.
* Supports many versions of Docker or can be used with Colima.
* When combined with Colima and Mutagen, performance is significantly improved.
* Automatic HTTPS.
* Run multiple projects concurrently.
* Can be used to develop many other CMSs.
* Support multiple databases (including MySQL, Postgre, SQLite).
* Lots of developer tools included, and is easy to extend and integrate.  

# Installing farmOS with DDEV and Composer

- First, follow the instructions to install and setup DDEV: https://ddev.readthedocs.io/en/latest/users/install/
- Once installed, the following commands will create a DDEV project and install farmOS:

```
ddev config --project-type=drupal10 --docroot=web --create-docroot --database=postgres:15 --php-version=8.1
ddev get wotnak/ddev-php-geos
ddev start
ddev composer create "farmos/project:3.x-dev"
ddev drush site:install farm --account-name=admin --account-pass=admin -y
ddev drush uli
ddev launch

> ```

Reviewer 3: If someone just does these commands after installing DDEV, I think they'd be using their current (possibly `$HOME`) directory as the project directory. Probably best to include a `mkdir -p {some path} && cd {some path}` as the first step.

Reviewer 2: Done: https://github.com/farmOS/farmOS-community-blog/pull/19/commits/7abd6f43811ef46355458fb4564cdcb601ac691d

@wotnak had also mentioned/included this previously. Adding it back.

- PHP CLI: `ddev php`
- Additional DDEV commands: https://ddev.readthedocs.io/en/latest/users/usage/cli/

### Drush
- Drush commands: `ddev drush {drush command}`
- Login link: `ddev drush uli`
- CRON: `ddev drush cron`
- Additional Drush commands: https://www.drush.org/latest/commands/all/

### Composer:
- Add dependency (exmple `farm_organic`): `ddev composer require drupal/farm_organic`
- Updating dependencies: `ddev composer update`
- See farmOS documentation on using Composer: https://farmos.org/hosting/composer/

# Going to production

It should be noted that DDEV _is not_ designed to be used as a production
hosting environment. DDEV is designed to make managing a local development
environment easier. Taking a local environment to production depends entirely
on how that production environment is built. Most composer-based workflows
will expect the project's `composer.json`, `composer.lock` and any application
code be checked in to source control, from which the production environment
can be built.

DDEV provides integrations with hosting providers to simplify the process of
syncing production data into a local environment. For more information see

> [Hosting Provider Integration](https://ddev.readthedocs.io/en/stable/users/providers/)

Reviewer 3: How many folks do you know using DDEV providers to actually deploy farmOS to production?

Unless there's a whole community doing that that I don't know about, I feel like we should be a bit more opinionated here in guiding folks towards the incumbent strategy of building a custom docker/OCI image using composer and deploying that somehow. I think there's more existing knowledge in our community about how to support folks pursuing that strategy.

The providers part still deserves a mention, but not IMHO in a way that makes it seem like that's the recommended strategy at this point.

There could also be a follow-up blog post on using DDEV providers for one or more production deployment scenarios.

Reviewer 2: > The providers part still deserves a mention, but not IMHO in a way that makes it seem like that's the recommended strategy at this point.

Ah I agree, but wasn't trying to recommend hosting providers here, just clarify that DDEV is not meant to be used in production itself. The DDEV hosting provider instructions mention the common sample integrations, but really this is a feature that can be customized for other production workflows as well. Maybe this can be clarified.

IMO "composer-based workflows" includes the strategy of creating custom docker images. But there could be many other approaches here as well. I'd rather not get too into these details in this post.. maybe we could include a couple links to "Installing farmOS" and "Building farmOS with composer" ?

```suggestion
# Going to production

It should be noted that DDEV _is not_ designed to be used as a production
hosting environment. DDEV is designed to make managing a local development
environment easier. Taking a local environment to production depends entirely
on how that production environment is built. Most composer-based workflows
will expect the project's `composer.json`, `composer.lock` and any application
code be checked in to source control, from which the production environment
can be built. For more information on hosting farmOS see:
- [Installing farmOS](https://farmos.org/hosting/install/)
- [Building farmOS with Composer](https://farmos.org/hosting/composer/)

DDEV offers hosting provider integration that can be customized for different
workflows to sync data between a production and local environment. For more
information and sample integrations see
[Hosting Provider Integration](https://ddev.readthedocs.io/en/stable/users/providers/)
```

Reviewer 3: I think describing the provider integrations as the last paragraph like that - without any caveat about it being somewhat uncharted territory - makes it read a bit like that's the default/recommended path...

How about:

```suggestion
# Going to production

It should be noted that DDEV _is not_ designed to be used as a production
hosting environment. DDEV is designed to make managing a local development
environment easier. Taking a local environment to production depends entirely
on how that production environment is built. Most composer-based workflows
will expect the project's `composer.json`, `composer.lock` and any application
code be checked in to source control, from which the production environment
can be built. For more information on hosting farmOS see:
- [Installing farmOS](https://farmos.org/hosting/install/)
- [Building farmOS with Composer](https://farmos.org/hosting/composer/)

Another strategy that might be worth experimenting with is DDEV's hosting
provider integrations. These can be customized for different workflows to sync
data between a production and the local environment. For more information see
[Hosting Provider Integration](https://ddev.readthedocs.io/en/stable/users/providers/).
```

# Docker image limitations

> farmOS has been using Docker and Docker Compose to create and distribute
> reproducible development environments for the past many years. Each commit to

Reviewer 3: "past many years" is a bit awkward. How about;

```suggestion
farmOS has historically used Docker and Docker Compose to create and distribute
reproducible development environments. Each commit to
```

Reviewer 2: Hmm yes - but does "historically used" make it sound like this is no longer the case? Maybe simply:

```suggestion
farmOS uses Docker and Docker Compose to create and distribute reproducible
development environments. Each commit to
```

farmOS builds a new Docker image that includes the environment and development

> dependencies required to install, test and lint the core codebase. While this

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
dependencies required to install, test, and lint the core codebase. While this
```

> process has worked well to onboard many new contributors and developers of
> farmOS, it has not been without a few headaches.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
process works well to onboard many new contributors and developers of
farmOS, it also produces some headaches.
```

> One of the larger issues has simply been that installing Docker in different
> operating systems is not always a trivial process. Once installed, there are
> often additional steps required to property configure, start and use the local
> Docker environment. Slow file systems in macOS and the WSL2 layer in Windows
> are two of the most common examples that come to mind.

Reviewer 3: Nit: I'd lean towards a bit more concise and less conversational language here...

```suggestion
Docker can be unintuitive to install and configure on non-linux systems. Long-existing platform issues
such as slow file systems in macOS and WSL2 complexities in Windows frequently present challenges for
new farmOS admins and developers.
```

Reviewer 2: Ha - while writing this I was thinking in my head how to make this read like a "blog post" and not "documentation". I think somewhere in-between is idea. Your suggestion reads well the above and below changes :+1:

> Another issue with this process has been using the single farmOS Docker image
> to do development of contributed and custom modules (or entire project sites!)
> that are separate from farmOS core. These use cases often require a more
> complex understanding of Docker volumes and composer to properly manage and
> update project dependencies that are not compatible with the simpler
> `docker pull` update strategy the farmOS docker image is designed for. It also
> becomes more challenging to share and recreate these custom develop enviroments
> with members on a larger team.

Reviewer 3: Nit: "this process" is a bit ambiguous at this point in the section. Minimum should be making that first sentence more specific, but I think the paragraph can be cleaned up more too...

```suggestion
Another issue with development and production environments based on the official
farmOS Docker images is that many use-cases quickly outgrow the default set of modules
and site configuration. In some cases, one can work around that with a deep understanding
of Docker and/or Docker compose, but such environments can be fragile to updates and
more challenging to document, share, and recreate in a team context.
```

> If you experience any of these issues while developing farmOS, give DDEV a try!

Reviewer 3: Nit: I prefer making the call to action more broad/sweeping instead of making it predicated (if only weakly) on already having run into issues with the official Docker instructions. How about:

```suggestion
DDEV offers a refreshing alternative to Docker for developing in/on farmOS - consider trying it out!
```

Reviewer 2: Good point. However DDEV still is docker... :-)

```suggestion
DDEV offers a refreshing experience for local development of farmOS in Docker - consider trying it out!
```

---
title: Installing farmOS on DDEV with Composer

> date: 2023-05-17
> author: rgcarr

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
date: 2023-11-05
author: rgcarr, Paul Weidner
```

require additional configuration when working on larger projects in different
environments like Colima. For these use-cases installing farmOS in a
[DDEV](https://ddev.com/) environment may be more straightforward.

> DDEV is an open source tool for running local web development environments for PHP, Python and Node.js, ready in minutes. Its powerful, flexible per-project environment configurations can be extended, version controlled, and shared. DDEV allows development teams to adopt a consistent Docker workflow without the complexities of bespoke configuration.

DDEV's many features are what make it a great way to build Drupal and farmOS
projects in a local environment:

* Cross-platform, open source software.
* Supports many versions of Docker or can be used with Colima.
* When combined with Colima and Mutagen, performance is significantly improved.
* Automatic HTTPS.
* Run multiple projects concurrently.
* Can be used to develop many other CMSs.
* Support multiple databases (including MySQL, PostgreSQL, SQLite).
* Lots of developer tools included, and is easy to extend and integrate.  

# Installing farmOS with DDEV and Composer

> - First, follow the instructions to install and setup DDEV: https://ddev.readthedocs.io/en/latest/users/install/
> - Once installed, you can create a DDEV project and install farmOS. Your DDEV project is configured to use
> a specific PHP and database version and can include additional DDEV addons and services. Here are two
> examples of how to create and configure your DDEV project:
> 
> 1. Use the `wotnak/ddev-farmos` addon to configure a DDEV project with the latest recommended versions
> of PHP, PostgreSQL and PHP GEOS for farmOS. This addon will also configure the private filesystem and a Cron job for Drupal.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- First, follow the instructions to install and setup DDEV: https://ddev.readthedocs.io/en/latest/users/install/
- Once installed you can create a DDEV project and install farmOS. Your DDEV project is configured to use a specific PHP and database version and can include additional DDEV addons and services. Here are two examples of how to create and configure your DDEV project:

1. Use the `wotnak/ddev-farmos` addon to configure a DDEV project with the latest recommended versions of PHP, PostgreSQL and PHP GEOS for farmOS. This addon will also configure the private filesystem and a Cron job for Drupal.
```

> --- 
>  title: Installing farmOS on DDEV with Composer 
>  date: 2023-05-17
>  author: rgcarr 
>  slug: 2023/installing-farmos-on-ddev-with-composer
>  --- 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
---
title: Installing farmOS on DDEV with Composer
date: 2023-05-17
author: rgcarr
slug: 2023/installing-farmos-on-ddev-with-composer
---

```

---
title: Installing farmOS on DDEV with Composer
date: 2023-05-17
author: rgcarr
slug: 2023/installing-farmos-on-ddev-with-composer
---

# DDEV

> DDEV is a great way to build Drupal projects in a local environment:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
DDEV is a great way to build Drupal projects in a local environment!
```

> # DDEV
> DDEV is a great way to build Drupal projects in a local environment:
> * Cross-platform, open source software.
> * Can be used with development for many other CMSs.
> * Automatic HTTPS.
> * Supports many versions of Docker or can be used with Colima.
> * When combined with Colima and Mutagen, performance is significantly improved.
> * Support multiple databases (including MySQL, Postgre, SQLite).
> * Lots of developer tools included, and is easy to extend and integrate.  
> 
> Instructions on setting up DDEV are at https://ddev.readthedocs.io/en/latest/users/install/
> 
> # Recommended Method to Install farmOS
> The recommended (and supported) method to install a farmOS local development environment (https://farmos.org/development/environment) is via a Docker container, but this may not work well with Colima.
> 
> There is also advice on installing farmOS using Composer: https://farmos.org/hosting/composer/
> 
> # Installing farmOS with DDEV and Composer
> For certain local environments, installing farmOS by Composer may be more straightforward. The following commands would allow farmOS to be installed in a DDEV container:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
# DDEV

The recommended (and supported) method to install a farmOS local development environment via Docker and Docker Compose is documented [here](https://farmos.org/development/environment). This method works great for simple projects in supported environments but can require additional configuration when working on multiple projects in different environments like Colima. For these use-cases installing farmOS in [DDEV](https://ddev.com/) may be more straightforward:

* Cross-platform, open source software.
* Supports many versions of Docker or can be used with Colima.
* When combined with Colima and Mutagen, performance is significantly improved.
* Automatic HTTPS.
* Run multiple projects concurrently.
* Can be used with development for many other CMSs.
* Support multiple databases (including MySQL, Postgre, SQLite).
* Lots of developer tools included, and is easy to extend and integrate.  

# Installing farmOS with DDEV and Composer

- Instructions on setting up DDEV are at https://ddev.readthedocs.io/en/latest/users/install/
- Once installed, the following commands will install farmOS in a DDEV project:
```

```

> mkdir farmos-ddev
> cd farmos-ddev
> ddev config --project-type=drupal9 --docroot=web --create-docroot --database=postgres:15 --php-version=8.1
> ddev get wotnak/ddev-php-geos
> ddev start
> ddev composer create "farmos/project:2.x-dev"
> ddev composer require drush/drush
> ddev drush site:install --account-name=admin --account-pass=admin -y
> ddev drush uli
> ddev launch

Reviewer 2: We can simplify these steps some (remove directory creation and drush requirement)

```suggestion
ddev config --project-type=drupal9 --docroot=web --create-docroot --database=postgres:15 --php-version=8.1
ddev get wotnak/ddev-php-geos
ddev start
ddev composer create "farmos/project:2.x-dev"
ddev drush site:install farm --account-name=admin --account-pass=admin -y
ddev drush uli
ddev launch
```

Reviewer: I wouldn't remove Drush requirement. While DDEV by default provides global Drush installation, the [recommended](https://www.drush.org/11.x/install/) way to install and use Drush is as a project dependency. Drush installation is also included in [official DDEV quickstart instructions for Drupal](https://ddev.readthedocs.io/en/stable/users/quickstart/#drupal). In my opinion, it would be good to also include it in the farmOS DDEV quickstart instruction.

Reviewer 2: Ah interesting, yes I think I agree @wotnak . I removed it because we actually include drush as a dependency of farmOS ([source](https://github.com/farmOS/farmOS/blob/5ca5f1a3abc19cc1d9085fa6c408e2e6c247bf6c/composer.json#L47)) and for a while we actually required an older version (iirc Drush 10) which caused some issues when dev environments tried to pull in the latest Drush 11... but here adding `drush/drush` *after* adding `farmos/project` shouldn't create this issue!

Reviewer: Didn't realize Drush is already included as a dependency of farmOS, in that case removing it from this instruction should be fine, and the fewer steps required to setup a working environment the better.

Reviewer 2: Yeah but I do agree with them that drush should be listed as a project dependency too. Ultimately it is the tool you are using to manage the site so being familiar with the dependency & version that you are using is smart. But also one less step.. :shrug:

```

# Additional Reference
More information on using DDEV with farmOS is available at https://github.com/paul121/farmos-ddev-template.

> CLI commands for DDEV are listed at https://ddev.readthedocs.io/en/latest/users/usage/cli/

Reviewer 2: @rgcarr I've actually just archived this repo since it is no longer needed :-) Here is what I would suggest we include as common/recommended usage:

```suggestion
# Usage

## Useful DDEV commands:
- Start/stop a project: `ddev start`/ `ddev stop`
- Open project: `ddev launch`
- Stop ddev: `ddev poweroff`
- PHP CLI: `ddev php`
- Additional DDEV commands: https://ddev.readthedocs.io/en/latest/users/usage/cli/

## Drush
- Drush commands: `ddev drush {drush command}`
- Login link: `ddev drush uli`
- CRON: `ddev drush cron`
- Additional Drush commands: https://www.drush.org/latest/commands/all/

## Composer:
- Add dependency (exmple `farm_organic`): `ddev composer require drupal/farm_organic`
- Updating dependencies: `ddev composer update`
- See farmOS documentation on using Composer: https://farmos.org/hosting/composer/
```

[farmOS development environment docs](https://farmos.org/development/environment). That method works great in
supported environments for developing farmOS core and small projects but can
require additional configuration when working on larger projects in different
environments like Colima. For these use-cases installing farmOS in a
[DDEV](https://ddev.com/) environment may be more straightforward.

> DDEV is an open source tool for running local web development environments for PHP, Python and Node.js, ready in minutes. Its powerful, flexible per-project environment configurations can be extended, version controlled, and shared. DDEV allows development teams to adopt a consistent Docker workflow without the complexities of bespoke configuration.

DDEV's many features are what make it a great way to build Drupal and farmOS
projects in a local environment:

* Cross-platform, open source software.
* Supports many versions of Docker or can be used with Colima.
* When combined with Colima and Mutagen, performance is significantly improved.
* Automatic HTTPS.
* Run multiple projects concurrently.
* Can be used to develop many other CMSs.

> * Support multiple databases (including MySQL, Postgre, SQLite).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Support multiple databases (including MySQL, PostgreSQL, SQLite).
```

* Lots of developer tools included, and is easy to extend and integrate.  

# Installing farmOS with DDEV and Composer

- First, follow the instructions to install and setup DDEV: https://ddev.readthedocs.io/en/latest/users/install/
- Once installed, the following commands will create a DDEV project and install farmOS:

```

> ddev config --project-type=drupal10 --docroot=web --create-docroot --database=postgres:15 --php-version=8.1
> ddev get wotnak/ddev-php-geos
> ddev start
> ddev composer create "farmos/project:3.x-dev"
> ddev drush site:install farm --account-name=admin --account-pass=admin -y
> ddev drush uli
> ddev launch

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
# Create a directory for the farmOS DDEV project
mkdir -p farmos-project && cd farmos-project
ddev config --project-type=drupal10 --docroot=web --create-docroot --database=postgres:15 --php-version=8.1
ddev get wotnak/ddev-php-geos
ddev start
ddev composer create "farmos/project:3.x-dev"
ddev drush site:install farm --account-name=admin --account-pass=admin -y
ddev drush uli
ddev launch
```
